Now, when you think of it, the Apostle Paul was a very humble man.
He was flexible.
He says, to the Jew, I became as a Jew.
And to those under law, I became as under law.
But there were limits to Paul's flexibility, and we're going to talk about that in just
a few moments.
First of all, though, when Paul came down to Jerusalem, the elders explained that thousands
of Jews had become believers, and they were all zealous for the law.
Now, they had heard a rumor about Paul.
They had heard the rumor that Paul was telling the Jews not to circumcise their children,
and the elders were worried about it.
They had a plan.
We read about that plan in Acts chapter 21, if you would like to turn there, Acts chapter
21, verses 23 and 24, here's their plan.
So do what we tell you.
We have four men who have put themselves under a vow.
Take these men with you, and cleanse yourself ceremonially together with them, and take
care of their expenses, so that they may have their heads shaved.
And everyone will know that there is nothing to the rumors they were told about you, but
that you are walking orderly, and you are also keeping the law.
Now it says, they have heard a rumor about you that you were telling Jews not to circumcise
their children.
Paul was probably not telling Jews not to circumcise their children.
Paul has already been mentioned, Paul took Timothy and circumcised him so as not to stumble
the Jews.
Paul realized that there was nothing wrong with circumcision per se.
It was when people proclaimed that circumcision was necessary in order to gain salvation,
that the problem arose.
So this was a rumor, but some brothers and sisters were willing to believe a rumor about a faithful
brother rather than to trust Paul.
Just as today some believe everything they read in the newspaper and they don't even ask
any questions.
So now here's the question.
What were they going to do about it?
The elders had a suggestion.
They said, we have four men who have put themselves under a vow, and they wanted Paul to
take these men to the temple and pay their expenses.
Paul agreed.
Now that took humility.
We all know how strongly Paul felt about keeping the law.
And yet Paul was willing to see the bigger picture.
He had strong feelings, but at the same time these Jews were probably new in the truth,
and Paul wanted to go as far as he could go so as not to stumble those new in the truth.
Now the vow.
What was the vow?
First scholars agreed that the vow was a probably a Nazarite vow.
And if it was, that was going to be tricky for Paul.
Because you see in Nazarites we're required to offer a sin offering when their vow came
to a completion.
Now Paul would never have agreed to that.
It would have shown disrespect for the sacrifice of Christ.
So Paul and those four men were going to have to be very careful about how far they would
go in the completion of this vow.
And we can be sure that they would never do anything that would go against their conscience.
Now we can see that on this occasion Paul went a long way so as not to stumble the Jews.
But on another occasion he refused to cater to the Jews.
We read about that at Galatians chapter 2.
Let's turn there.
Galatians chapter 2.
And we'll read verses 11 to 14.
Galatians 2, 11 to 14.
However, when Seifas came to Antioch, I resisted him face to face because he was clearly
in the wrong.
For before certain men from James arrived, he used to eat with people of the nations.
But when they arrived he stopped doing this and separated himself, fearing those of the
circumcised class.
The rest of the Jews also joined him in putting on this pretence so that even Barnabas was
that along with them and their pretence.
But when I saw that they were not walking in step with the truth of the good news, I said
to Seifas before them all, if you, though you were a Jew, live as the nations do and not
as Jews do, how can you compel people of the nations to live according to Jewish practice?
So we see what was happening here.
Up till the time when men from James came down to Antioch, Peter and Arnebus and the other
Jewish Christians were happily eating with the Gentiles.
But now a man from James came down and suddenly Peter starts to separate himself from the Gentiles
and following his lead, other Jewish Christians began doing the same thing.
Now who was probably new in the truth?
In this case it was probably the Gentile Christians.
In Acts 21 it was probably the Jews who were newer in the truth and Paul didn't want
to stumble the Jews, but at this point Paul could not be all things to all people.
He couldn't please the Jews, he couldn't please the men from James and also please the
Gentiles.
He was either going to have to stumble, if you will, the men from James or he was going
to have to stumble the Gentiles.
He had to make a choice and so Paul made his choice.
And what did he do about it?
He followed the advice that he recorded in this same book of Galatians.
Can you think of what that was?
Galatians chapter 6.
Was it saying, if a man takes a false step before he is aware of it?
What did Paul say about Peter?
He was not walking in step with the good news so Peter was taking a false step.
You who have spiritual qualifications, that would be Paul, try to readjust such a man
in his spirit of mildness.
And that's what the Apostle Paul did.
Now we love to pick on Peter.
But let's give the poor man a break.
Let's give him credit for what he was doing right.
This was Antioch.
Now what do we know about Antioch?
It was in Antioch when the whole matter of keeping the law blew up in the first place.
And who was it who were stirring things up in Antioch?
It was men from Jerusalem, men from James.
Now up until this point, Peter and Barnabas and the others, they're happily eating with
the Gentiles until men from Jerusalem come down and start stirring up trouble.
You kind of think that if they'd stayed home once in a while, there would have been
a lot less trouble in the Christian congregation.
So Peter was doing the right thing up until the men from James came down.
Now Peter knew how critical men from James could be or men from Jerusalem could be.
He might say he'd seen that movie before in 36 CE.
Just after the conversion of Cornelius, notice a detail in Acts chapter 11, verses 2 and
3.
And this might help us at least understand Peter's concern and perhaps a misguided effort,
not to stumble the men from James.
Acts chapter 11 verses 2 and 3.
So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, this is in 33 CE.
The supporters of circumcision began to criticize him, saying, you went into the house of men
who were not circumcised and ate with them.
Well Peter knew how sensitive Jews were about eating with the Gentiles, but he was moved
by the fear of man and the Apostle Paul did right to approve him.
Because after all, he was going to have to make a choice.
You stumble the Jews or you stumble the Gentiles.
The lesson?
The take away?
There are times when you can't please everyone.
There are times when you cannot be all things to all people.
Our young people have to realize that.
You have to take a stand for what is right and let the ships fall where they may.
Now you have to appreciate the wisdom that Jesus used in selecting Paul as an Apostle
to the nations.
And note to the elders, Paul was flexible.
He didn't insist on his own ideas, even when he felt strongly about a matter.
And he didn't create unnecessary issues.
Paul looked at the big picture, what a marvelous example for us.
And we can say that humble Paul was the right man for the job.